--- Documentation for the production of MEGA-SCSI ---
1995/06/27 K. Tsujikawa.


□ Files included in this archive

SCSI-MK .HED reprint header file
SCSI-MK .TXT This file
SCSI-AP .TXT Pin layout data for each chip
SCSI-C0 .SR7 MEGA-SCSI circuit diagram (1/3)
SCSI-C1 .SR7 MEGA-SCSI circuit diagram (2/3)
SCSI-C2 .SR7 MEGA-SCSI circuit diagram (3/3)


□ Introduction

MEGA-SCSI is a SCSI interface for MSX proposed by Tsujikawa.
-SCSI-1 (CCS), 2 standard HDD, MO, CD-ROM, etc. can be used with MSX.
-MEGA-SCSI can be created by modifying a mega ROM game.

For people who can't make it, we also distribute the finished product, but it is better to make it yourself
It's cheap, fun and attractive, so I recommend making it yourself.

The circuit of this production article focuses on improving reproducibility.
The circuit is made simple by using parts that are easily available.

However, I couldn't write it in a way that was easy to understand.
I think it is difficult to understand unless you have some experience in making hardware.

If you are a beginner of hardware, experience with electronic work kits and my similar non-RAM disk etc.
We recommend that you try it after you have accumulated it.

There are many points that should be improved in this circuit, and each person has their own taste.
I will.

Please try making your own original hardware.
And if you think it's a good idea, please let me know.

The treasure report from everyone is my treasure.
Thank you for your completion report and ideas.


□ Anyway, let's prepare the materials

The materials are as follows.

Item name Quantity Remarks

1x MB89352A Somewhat difficult to obtain
2x 628128 The slowest thing (about 120nS) is enough for speed
   Low power consumption type is good (628128LP-12L etc.)
1x 74HC139  LS139 etc. may be used
1x EXO-3 16MHz 18MHz Oscillator Any
1x 220/330 collective resistance of 29 elements. 36 ordinary resistors can be substituted
2x 10k ohm resistance   4.7k-100k ohm. Appropriate
3x 0.1uF Ceramic capacitor
1x 100uF Aluminum electrolysis capacitor, etc. are suitable
2x 1S1588 Appropriate switching diode may be used
1x 11DQ04 Schottky barrier diode
1x 1.0A fuse Lucky if you can buy a small one lead type
1x 1.0F Electric double layer capacitor  is safe
1x Mega ROM Game 1 This may be the most difficult to obtain
1x DX10GM-50S (Hirose) half pitch SCSI connector. Please choose
1x ICB-288G (Sun Hayato) Small universal board
1x Junflon wire A proper amount A suitable vinyl wire is enough. Thin things are convenient

―― Tinned wire A little bit of resistance may be enough
――A proper amount of solder with varnish and a thickness of about 0.8mm is easy to use
∙ For soldering wire 15cm? GND wiring. Recycle after removing ROM?
Screw 2 diameter 3 mm * length 10 mm
Nuts that fit two screws
Spring washers 6 Spacer replacements. What suits the screw

For reference, here is an example of where you can buy it in Akihabara.
≪Mega ROM games are almost no longer found in Akihabara.
Prepare from your own collection.

MB89352A Wakamatsu Tsusho, Kamwa Denki (Radio Department Store 1F, near the entrance)
628128 Shinwa Denki, Wakamatsu Tsusho
220/330 Suzusho, Tansei
DX10GM-50S Sengoku Densho

Other parts are radio department stores, under guard, Akizuki Denshi, Suzusho
You can find it at Sengoku Densho.

Small parts such as resistors, capacitors and screws are easy to lose and the price is low
I think it's good to buy more because it is not expensive.

For those who can't come to Akihabara so easily, mail-order sales of magazine advertisements such as transistor technology
It is also handy to use. You can buy something like MB89352.


□ Selection of mega ROM

━ In this production article, a mega ROM controller called LZ93A13 is used.
Detailed explanation about the Mega ROM controller is separately provided.
Please refer to the analysis data.

According to the analysis data, LZ93A13 is ASC1 type.
ASC2 and ASC3 type mega ROM controllers can also be used as MEGA-SCSI,
I think it will be difficult unless you can understand the analysis data properly.

In this production, the original ROM is removed and SRAM is installed there.
The original ROM is a mega ROM cartridge that uses a 28-pin or 32-pin ROM
It will be easy to make.

That is,
・ LZ93A13 is used
28/32 pin ROM is used
Items that meet the two conditions are suitable for production.

If you can't get a proper mega ROM board, please contact me by email.
Please try. In some cases, you may be able to transfer it at a reasonable price.
But I can't prepare so much, so prepare by yourself as much as possible
 Please.


□ Outline of production

Remove the ROM from the mega ROM game.
The removed ROM may be thrown away, so the legs of the ROM should be cracked with a nipper.
It is relatively easy to remove one by one.

SRAM is mounted on the extracted ROM.
There are pins that can use the original ROM wiring and pins that do not.
Please cut the pattern properly depending on the tester and the circuit diagram.

The lower part of the address bus and the wiring of the data bus are almost the same in ROM and SRAM, so
It should save you time and effort. I think SCSI-AP.TXT will be helpful.

HC139 and EXO-3 are short-circuited with other signal lines in the empty space of the mega ROM board.
Pay attention not to have it, fix it with double-sided tape, and wire in the air.

↑ The work up to this point is the same as for a non-RAM disk.
It may be good to refer to the article on making a non-RAM disk.

MB89352, Terminator (220/330) and SCSI connector are mounted on ICB-288G,
Connect with the mega ROM controller side with a vinyl wire.
Cut off unnecessary parts of ICB-288G in advance.

When wiring the MB89352 and the SCSI connector, first wire the GND firmly
Let's go.
If the GND wiring is thin, the operation will become unstable.
I wired the GND using a desoldering wire with a width of about 4 mm.

If possible, use a terminator such as an IC socket so that it can be removed.
It is good to put it in, but if it is troublesome, you can attach it directly.

The wiring around MB89352 is a lot and it will be difficult, but please wire the gun battery.

For ICB-288G, it is good to bite the spacer properly and screw it to the case.
Uh.
It is also necessary to make holes in the case accordingly.


□ Circuit diagram supplement

11DQ04 and 1.0A fuse is for supplying power to TERMPWR (38).

According to the SCSI standard, the initiator (in this case MEGA-SCSI) powers TERMPWR
It is supposed to be supplied, but in reality the target (hard
It is a disk etc.).

According to MSX standard, it cannot supply enough current to TERMPWR to meet SCSI standard.
If you are worried about MSX standard, please omit 11DQ04 and fuse.

If you omit this, the target is not connected, the power is not on
In such cases, the SCSI bus becomes unstable, so try accessing SCSI at this time.
Then you will almost certainly hang up.

About the power supply area, it will be long to write, so round up here.
11DQ04 and fuse ... Please make your own judgment.


□ Completed? Recommended for operation check

First, check if the power supply is short-circuited.
There are three power supply systems for MEGA-SCSI, so please check each.

・ Around normal power supply
・ SRAM backup power supply area
・ Around TERMPER

Please check other signal lines carefully.
In case of poor soldering, press the stick of the tester to improve the contact and properly
▽ You may mistakenly think that it is connected.

 Should be fine! If you are sure, plug it into the MSX and turn it on.
If MSX does not start normally, immediately turn off the power and check again.

After the startup is complete, install the product.
Please refer to the installer documentation for details.
If the installation is successful and it is recognized as a system, this time SCSI connection
Connect HDD etc. to the computer.

Look at Inquiries on INQ.COM (made by Mr. Taro).
Is the HDD properly recognized?

After that, start the setup tool etc. and try various operations.
It will be almost safe if you reach here.
Enjoy a comfortable MEGA-SCSI life.


□ Troubleshooting is important.

It didn't work, Check was dead.
Maybe it's a bug in the schematic or software ...

Most people are not working well in one shot.
Some people suddenly give completion reports, but most of the time they repeat questions on the Internet
Then, I checked, fixed it, and finally moved.

If it doesn't work well, ask a question on the internet or send an email attack to Tsujikawa.
Let's do it.

However, if you have any questions, please explain the situation and ask specifically.

How do I answer the panicking question that "it doesn't work, what should I do?"
I don't know if it's good.

Please be as calm as possible and write as much detail as possible.
If you write a lot, you may wonder how hard you understand.
I think you can give an answer that suits your level.

Also, even if you think that it is not a big deal for yourself, if you report it, it is actually a solution
Sometimes it is connected to the clue of the decision.
▽ Please judge it arbitrarily and do not summarize it, but explain the situation in detail.
Please explain the facts and your own thoughts.
▽ Even if you hurry to ask a question, the solution will be delayed.


Bad example: It seems that the power supply is shorted and it does not start (; _;)

Reply example: Please check around the power supply again :-(


Good example: MSX body is GT. Nothing is connected to the SCSI connector.
I inserted MEGA-SCSI in slot 1 and nothing in slot 2.
Even when the power of MSX is turned on, the black screen remains and even the title characters are displayed.
	 not.
It was similar when I made a mapper RAM and shorted the power supply before.
Similarly this time the power supply is short